Mike,

I got through to Figures 5a and 5b which seem to be about as far as you got in the processing.  Here are some comments
and corrections (some of them being for my own mistakes I should have caught earlier).

I'm not too crazy about putting the final comments at the beginning unless those paragraphs are made into a preface.
Otherwise I'm afraid they will make the subject boring and lose the reader before he even gets going.

"ISRs can be range from..."  should read, "ISRs can range from..."  (Remove the word "be".)

The writing in the cartoon of the girl in the college dorm is almost lost in the pixel size.  At least that one should
be bigger to make sure the "Sociology assignment due Friday" is legible.  That will make the word "interrupt" over the
phone bigger too.  Since the dresser lines don't go all the way down, can you lop off a little bit of the bottom, a
little below the drawer handle?

I need to find out if the WDC 65c02 has SToP and WAIt like the '816 does.  My data sheets are ambiguous, so in one place
I say only the '816 has these instructions, and later I say the '02 does too.  I went to WDC's website to check, but it
didn't have anything about WDC!  Do you know what's going on???!!!

In "and you can branch on that with BMI or BPL. LDA VIA1_STATUS will put bit 7 of the VIA's status..."  the instruction
part should be in the same font the listings are in.  The same goes for five occurrences in the paragraph with "What you
could do is have SERVICE_VIA1 end..."  (since SERVICE_VIA1 is a label in the code), for BIT VIA_T1CL in the second
paragraph above the "Ghost interrupts" cartoon, and for six lines below that cartoon where it says, "made part of
subroutine TRN_CNT_OFF."  The paragraph right below that has the wrong font--  not the same one used in the rest of the
text.  Besides looking different, it makes the lines quite a bit longer.

For "Figure 4. Example tree of potential interrupt sources", the diagram just shows up as a little square with a red X
in it.  Maybe this is one of the things you said was still missing?

In the first full paragraph after "1.4  SETTING UP AN INTERRUPT", the steps A., B., and C. should each start on new
lines, like an outline.  There is a whole line missing right before "IRQ input", right before "Step A requires..."

In the first line after that little piece of code, where the text says, "point to the address at label ISR", the label
should be "CNT_ISR", not just "ISR".

The paragraph right above the SEI (Miss Whitley) cartoon has an opening parenthesis at "(Note that 6502-based
microcontrollers may have ..."  but there's no closing parenthesis.  Put the closing parenthesis at the end of the
paragraph.

Figures 5a and 5b do not show up correctly.  I take it that's as far as you got, since many things after that need work.

Garth